Attachment C 

Draft Criteria for Atlanta 10-County Special Tax District 

Recommended Criteria for the Development of an Investment List of Projects and Programs. 

Excludes 15% Local Share to be distributed by formula to Cities and Counties. 

 

 

OVERVIEW 

 

Outcomes - The following desired outcomes drove the development of the draft investment criteria: 

. 
Strategic use of funds to achieve the best value for taxpayers' dollars and improvement of the region’s 
transportation network. 
. 
Transportation projects delivered on time and on budget. 
. 
Public support for projects funded by the regional sales tax and public trust that state and local 
governments will deliver on their promises. 


 

Guiding Principles - The following principles guided the development of the draft investment criteria: 

. 
Investment list is developed with a focus on deliverability. 
. 
Projects are from existing plans and/or studies (for example, the GDOT work program, ARC long 
range plan and short range program, ARC Congestion Management Process, county transportation 
studies, etc.). 
. 
Investment list is consistent with the policies of the Statewide Strategic Transportation Plan and 
policies of the Atlanta Region’s PLAN 2040. 
. 
Investment list encourages effective multimodal solutions that appeal to a broad spectrum of the 
region’s citizens. 


 

Framework for Investment Criteria 

 

The final investment list of projects to be funded by the Transportation Investment Act’s (TIA) regional 
transportation sales tax referendum will be developed by first setting investment allocation target ranges 
for each program area (see #1 on page 2 ) based on the Statewide Strategic Transportation Plan (SSTP) 
and the Atlanta Regional Commission’s PLAN 2040. These will be used to align the Unconstrained 
Example Investment List (UEIL) with performance goals for each program area within the revenue 
expected to be available. Next, projects being considered for support by the TIA revenue will be 
evaluated using qualitative screening criteria (see #on page 2) designed to allow further consideration of 
projects that align with the SSTP and PLAN 2040 and can be delivered within the timeframe of the 
regional sales tax. 

 

The Transportation Investment Act also requires that the criteria include performance goals and that 
projects on the investment list include a “statement of expected public benefits.” Performance goals and 
public benefits analysis are inter-related and become one of the many tools to assist the Director of 
Planning to formulate the Unconstrained Example Investment List. The performance goals and public 
benefits will be provided along with the Unconstrained Example Investment List at a later date. The kind 
of metrics that will be used to determine the public benefit will come from the SSTP and PLAN 2040. 
Ultimately, they are intended to assist the Roundtable in selecting the best projects and to allow the 
region’s citizens a solid evaluation of the use of their sales tax dollars. 


DRAFT CRITERIA FOR ATLANTA SPECIAL DISTRICT 

 

1. Draft Investment Allocation Target Ranges 


 

a. Minimum and maximum investment goals (for the 10-year period) for program areas will 
support implementation of the Statewide Strategic Transportation Plan. 


 

b. Program areas and allocation ranges: 


 

Program Areas 

Target Ranges 

Roadway Capital 

20-50% 

Transit Capital 

10-40% 

Transit Operations and Maintenance 

5-20% 

Safety 

5-10% 

Traffic Operations 

2-5% 

Non-motorized (Bike/Pedestrian) 

0-5% 

Freight and Logistics 

0-2% 

Aviation 

0-2% 

Roadway and Bridge Maintenance(Asset Management) 

 0-5% 



 

2. Draft Screening Criteria by Program Area 


 

a. Roadway Capital 
i. The projects that qualify under “roadway capital” serve origins or destinations of 
trips to/from employment and activity centers throughout the region. Alternately, 
roadway capital projects are among the most congested regional corridors as 
determined through ARC’s Congestion Management Process. These projects 
could be roadway widenings, interchanges, interstate improvements, etc. 
ii. Emphasis will be on the construction phase, but projects can be included in the 
Unconstrained Example Investment List which are able to demonstrate 
assurances of deliverability of any funded phase within the 10 year sales tax 
period, including preliminary engineering, environmental reviews, and right-of-
way. 
iii. The Director of Planning recommends prioritization of the project selection as 
follows: (Tiers reflect the level of certainty in deliverability) 
a) Tier One – Projects that have construction phases which can begin within six 
years of the start of the regional sales tax. 
b) Tier Two – Projects which have an approved concept report with no other 
work completed. 
c) Tier Three – Projects recommended and endorsed by the local governments, 
MPO, or legislators but which have not reached the milestones noted above. 






 

b. Transit Capital 
i. To comply with HB 277 Section 7, the highest consideration will be given to the 
projects that are most highly prioritized by ARC (in conjunction with the 
Director of Planning and GRTA) per economic benefit, lowest environmental 
impact, and completion of environmental permitting (O.C.G.A. 50-32-5 (f).) 





ii. Emphasis will be on the construction phase or acquisition of capital equipment. 
iii. Transit capital projects should have a contingency plan to operate or liquidate 
assets if future operating funds are based on a renewal of HB 277. 
iv. Transit projects should have independent utility. 
v. Transit service for the proposed project should be provided in more than one 
county. 
vi. Transit service for the proposed project should ultimately connect to employment 
centers or activity centers in the region. 
vii. Transit projects should serve areas with land use ordinances that enable increased 
development densities around stops and stations. 
viii. Capital expenditures may include new, systematic replacement, upgrades, 
refurbishment, etc. 
ix. The Director of Planning recommends the prioritization of the project selection 
as follows: (Tiers reflect the level of certainty in deliverability) 


a) Tier One – If an EIS is anticipated, the approved draft environmental 
documentation or FTA-approved LPA and Alternative Analysis will be 
completed by the end of FY 2012. 
b) Tier Two – Projects which have completed a feasibility study 
c) Tier Three - Projects recommended and endorsed by the local governments, 
ARC or legislators but which have not reached the milestones noted above. 
Tier three projects might be those projects that may be the 
feasibility/development work for future infrastructure projects to be funded 
beyond the 10 year sales tax. 


 

c. Transit Operations and Maintenance 
i. Any funding must first serve to enhance the existing “core” regional transit 
systems in operation as of January 1, 2011. The “core” is defined as the transit 
service that crosses at least one county boundary and includes stops and/or 
stations in more than one county. After the existing core is brought up to a state 
of good repair, operations and maintenance funding from the regional sales tax 
would then be allocated to new transit capacity projects (with exception of such 
portions of MARTA’s system in existence on January 1, 2011 – see O.C.G.A 48-
8-241c). 


 

d. Safety 
i. Projects which align with the key emphasis areas of the Governor’s Strategic 
Highway Safety Plan (SHSP.) 
ii. Priority is given to projects that correct or improve a road location or feature with 
high potential for safety improvement, or addresses a specific highway safety 
deficiency. The objective of each project is to reduce fatalities and serious 
injuries. 
iii. Projects may include intersection improvements to address safety concerns, 
shoulder widening, pedestrian/bicycle safety improvements, projects that 
eliminate hazards at rail-roadway crossings, traffic calming measures, installation 





of guardrails, crash attenuators, traffic signals, signage, and pavement marking 
improvement projects, etc. 


e. Traffic Operations and High Tech Traffic Solutions 
i. Projects which improve or enhance the region’s intelligent transportation system 
network, incident management program, or signal coordination and timing where 
applicable. 
ii. Projects address an existing operational issue resulting in an improved level of 
service or reduction in delay or other congestion costs. 




f. Non-motorized 
i. Projects which are identified in the Atlanta Region’s Bike/Ped Plan. 
ii. Projects which provide connectivity to a regional activity center. 
iii. Projects which provide connection to existing or planned transit including bus 
stops and multi-modal centers. (Note: Off-roadway paths/streetscapes, etc. 
should be pursued using the 15% discretionary share.) 




g. Freight and Logistics 
i. Projects which address the demand for goods movement into, out of, and within 
the state as identified through the Statewide Freight and Logistics Study 
(ongoing) or the Atlanta Regional Freight Mobility Plan. 
ii. Projects which enhance the flow of freight transported by trucks and/or rail. 
iii. Projects which facilitate the transfer of freight between modes. 




h. Aviation 
i. Projects at new or existing non-commercial service airports which are contained 
in the airport's 5-year Airport Capital Improvement Program submitted annually 
to the GA DOT and FAA. The types of projects included in this area are 
runways, taxiways, aprons, and navigational aids. 
ii. Projects which are consistent with the goals and objectives of Georgia's 
Statewide Aviation System Plan. 
i. Roadway and Bridge Maintenance (asset management) 


 

i. Priority for resurfacing/rehabilitation needs is on state routes or routes that are 
considered regionally significant as defined by roads that connect regional 
employment centers. Priority will be based on PACES and bridge ratings 
provided by GDOT. (Note: Off-system resurfacing should be pursued using the 
15% discretionary share.) 




 


